Periodization styles for performance
versus aesthetics. Typically, the
discussion revolves around periodization
strategies for hypertrophy versus
strength. However, you are going to see
why I've made that differentiation, and
this presentation is geared towards
industry professionals. This is my
mentorship group that I'm presenting in
front of. So, they have a base level of
knowledge. However, I like to simplify
these concepts so that anyone
understands it. So, you don't need a
degree. You don't need to be an industry
professional. You do love to know how to
train and love to know what programming
involves and periodization and all of
those things, and I'm going to teach you
more of that. Something that I always
learned was the smarter I got, the
stronger I got. So, that's how I like to
treat all the people that I work with is
teach them about the concepts that
taught me how to be really, really
strong so that you guys can also be
really, really strong. Anyway, let's get
into it. I hope you enjoy. Today is one
of my favorite topics, and that's
periodization. But, it's going to be
framed in a slightly different way to
the way that I've done it in the past.
So, what I'm talking about today is
periodization for performance versus
aesthetics. So, this is a very common
topic of discussion, but it's framed in
a slightly different way. It's usually
framed as periodization for strength
versus hypertrophy. However, I believe
that's the wrong framing. Why? That's
mainly because I would say strength is
needed for hypertrophy, or I should say
aesthetics or bodybuilding. And
hypertrophy is needed for strength. So,
to say there's a specific style of
periodization for strength, it's like,
well, strength is one of the phases that
we do for performance over the long-term
plan, just as is hypertrophy. And vice
versa is also true. I'm going to get
into the nuts and bolts of both of those
modalities. So, instead of calling them
a strength versus hypertrophy, I'm
calling them for what they are,
performance. So, strength is one of the
adaptations that is important for a lot
of performance sports. And mainly, a lot
of people are referring to periodization
for like powerlifting. That's one of the
most common and easiest ways to frame
this discussion, but performance is
needed for more sports than just
powerlifting. So, for powerlifters, the
end goal is one rep max range for a
bench press, squat, and a deadlift. But,
we can also periodize for other sports,
other strength sports such as
weightlifting, which is clean and jerk
and snatch, strongman, which has a
varied amount of different events and is
always different depending on the show.
CrossFit is now considered a strength
sport, and then we consider other
performance sports as well that, you
know, I say non-strength sports, and a
lot of people get their panties in a
bunch over this. When I talk about
things like rugby or combat sports like
martial arts. Now, by definition, a
strength sport is a sport where you're
lifting weights as part of the sport. In
rugby, you're not lifting weights. You
need strength. It's hugely important for
your ability to play rugby at a high
level, and same with combat sports.
Strength matters, absolutely, but it's a
non-strength sport in terms of you don't
need to lift weights as part of the
sport. You need to knock people out,
beat them in fights, and you need to
score goals in your team sports.
Okay? And we're going to get into all of
that. If you want to lift weights, this
has got you covered from from day one of
lifting weights. First, we have to
understand, and then I like to define
all of these, you know, terms.
Periodization, and I just don't like the
definition of periodization, which is, I
guess you could say, the manipulation
and logical sequencing of training
variables over the long term to reach a
certain goal by a specific date or
competition. So, training variables
include endurance, hypertrophy,
strength, power, et cetera. Now, here's
the problem with this. So, understanding
this definition doesn't really do much
in terms of you're an amazing coach and
you want to try and teach your athlete,
your lifter, your client the idea of
what periodization is. A lot of times
I've heard in the industry, "Do you guys
follow periodization?" It's a question
that I ask commonly. And everyone's
like, "Yeah, I do." And then my next
question is, "Can you tell me what
periodization actually is?" And then
everyone just goes silent. It's like,
"What do I do now?" Okay? So, this is
what we could call a formal definition
of periodization. The problem with this
is, if someone asks you what
periodization is and you spit this out,
it doesn't really tell you much. So,
that's what I want you to understand.
So, basically, periodization and
programming isn't the same thing.
Program sits within the periodized plan.
The periodized plan is your long-term
plan. It's how we split up these
different training variables into
specific phases and organize them in a
logical sequence so that we can peak
when we need to peak, such as a
competition date. I'm talking about
periodization for performance as well as
aesthetics. You know, the competition
date might be stepping up on a stage in
your underwear, in a bikini contest, or
summer's here and I want to get in a
bikini, or wedding date. Same principles
apply, okay? So, it's different type of
peak. So, peak in performance requires,
you know, competition readiness. Peak in
aesthetics requires two things that we
can work towards. One of them is
achieved by training and that's muscle
hypertrophy, muscle building. The next
thing is mainly achieved by nutrition.
And that is our body composition. We're
going to get into that, but first, when
I'm defining what periodization is,
instead of giving a definition, I kind
of want to talk about why we periodize
to help you understand what
periodization is. And the analogy that I
like to use is the man who chases two
rabbits doesn't eat. What do those
rabbits represent? The rabbits represent
our training modalities, hypertrophy,
strength endurance, strength, power.
These are the different modalities and a
lot of the times if you ask someone,
"What do you want to achieve over the
long term?" It's like, "I want all of
that, thanks." Now, the problem is when
we provide equal emphasis to all of
those physical qualities, we end up not
really achieving high-levels in any of
them. I understand this. So, science and
practical experience show trying to
develop multiple qualities at the same
time with equal emphasis. So, I've added
that in. A lot of the times I say, you
know, you can't chase two rabbits at the
same time, right? You have to chase one
before we move on to the next. And a lot
of people look at it and say, "That's
false because there's so many things
that we need. And if you spend so much
time chasing one rabbit, you're going to
detrain all of these other physical
qualities." And to an extent, that is
true. So, a lot of amazing sports
scientists have come up with varying
strategies to allow us to train multiple
physical qualities. But, this is the key
point here, not with equal emphasis,
right? So, if you provide equal emphasis
on all these physical qualities, it's
going to be, you know, diluted outcomes.
The strategies where you do train
multiple physical qualities
simultaneously successfully will always
prioritize a main physical quality and
utilize different physical qualities on
a maintenance level. Okay? So, you apply
a lot more volume and focus on the main
physical quality. And with your
accessory work, you maintain the other
physical qualities that you don't want
to detrain. So, what are the main
differences between performance and
aesthetics? Performance requires the
development of several physical
qualities. Different sports have
different demands. So, picking
strategies differ. But, when we talk
about strength, people kind of default
to powerlifting. I kind of do as well,
because it's easy and it's, you know,
what I'm good at. But, you know, you
don't use the same periodization plan
for a powerlifter as you would for a
rugby player or a sprinter. You know,
there's different physical qualities
that we are needing to achieve over the
long term plan or specifically at the
end of the long term plan, okay? Where
one sport may require maximum strength,
such as powerlifting, and another sport
may require maximum power or speed, such
as track and field combat sports or most
team sports as a matter of fact, okay?
Now, training for aesthetics focuses
mainly on hypertrophy. Okay? So, that's
what we can train towards. So, that's
the main training modality. Body
composition is best managed through
nutritional strategy, aka calorie
deficit. There's a lot more to it than
that, but, you know, it's usually about
getting as lean as possible through
nutrition and building the muscles that
we need specific to our goals through
hypertrophy style of training. So,
hypertrophy style of training isn't
periodization. It's one of the
modalities that we include in a
periodized plan. Okay, but hypertrophy
isn't periodization. Which begs the
question, is periodization even needed
for aesthetics goals? People will say
things like, you shouldn't periodize for
bodybuilding outcomes or aesthetics
outcomes. It's unnecessary. Not that you
shouldn't, but rather that it's
unnecessary. Why is it unnecessary?
Because training for hypertrophy is very
forgiving. Okay, there's no specific
exercise you must do. In fact, there are
several different tools to achieve the
same outcomes. Such as, you know, if we
want to build things like quadriceps,
you know? So, what's the exercise that
you use for quadriceps? Well, in
powerlifting, you need to squat. In
bodybuilding or aesthetics preparation,
you can do a hack squat, you can do a
lunge, you can do a leg extension. There
is so many different exercises that you
can use, and specificity doesn't matter
as much. Definition of specificity for
aesthetics is the specific muscle you
need to be targeting should be the
limiting factor of the movement. Okay,
so that's the specificity component of
training for aesthetics. The specificity
component of training for performance is
the specific sport that you need to be
good at. That's what you need to
practice a lot of. Specificity for
bodybuilding is the specific muscle
group you need to train. That's what you
need to train. That's what you need to
develop. Proportionately, the next thing
is bodybuilding. So, let's just say the
sport of bodybuilding. And under that
banner comes bikini, physique, whatever
the other categories are. There's so
many of them. It's not just about
building as much muscle everywhere.
Okay? Symmetry and proportion is a huge
factor. So, it's not about the biggest
athlete in these in any of these
categories. So, you know, is
periodization even needed for aesthetics
goals? The answer is no, it's not
needed. But my opinion is it wouldn't be
a bad idea to consider some type of a
periodized plan. Okay? Which we're going
to get to different strategies. But
first, I want to talk about
periodization for performance, because
this is where a lot of the research is
based around. Okay? So, over the years,
several strategies have been created by
different sports scientists, and each
have pros and cons. The general premise
of all styles of periodization is to
begin the long-term plan. So,
periodization isn't the program. So,
what I write for you guys is typically
mesocycle at a time. That's the programs
that I teach you to be good at. And I'm
going to I'm not going to give you
programs in this session. Okay? I've
done plenty of that, and we're going to
do plenty more, but right now we're
talking about how to consider a
long-term plan where we start working
with a client, whether it's an athlete
or just a general population, and you
know, we start with our goal setting.
So, all of our pre-exercise
questionnaires when you start training
with someone, you want to figure out,
"What are we working towards?" You know,
of course, some people say, "I don't
know. I'm training for life. I know I
need to be fitter and stronger and live
longer." Great, you know, that's that's
one thing. Where I will To be honest
with you, I don't just say, "Cool, you
got no goals, so we're just going to
train aimlessly and try and do
everything at once." That's also not
what I do. What I like to do is
encourage the individual to work towards
something. And I set some type of a
goal. Usually, you know, of course, my
bias kicks in here. I will set them up
with a strength goal, and I will
introduce to them periodization and
planning to be able to achieve different
outcomes with different physical
qualities over the long term and peak
at, you know, an arbitrary time, which I
typically say, "You know, if you come to
me and say, 'Don't have a goal, just
want to be generally better,' I'd say,
'All right, you know, for me to get a
really great outcome in anything with
you, give me about 16 weeks.'" Okay? So,
typically, that's kind of my default,
just like a default is a 4-week
mesocycle. Sometimes I do more, very
rarely do less. And my 16-week plans, if
I don't have a goal date that I'm
working towards, I'd say, "That's a nice
number that you can see a really nice
outcome in that time period." Okay? So,
how long does it take to build
significant amount of muscle? How long
does it take to build or lose a
significant amount of body fat and, you
know, see meaningful difference in your
physique or your strength? So, I say,
"Well, you can see some in 8 weeks. you
can see something in 12 weeks. I'm going
to see more in 16 weeks, actually. And I
want you to be really, really happy with
the outcome. So, so 16 weeks, that's my
sweet spot. But, if you come to me and
say, "Wedding date is in 12 weeks or 8
weeks or whatever it might be or I'm
stepping in the ring for my pro debut in
8 weeks' time." Well, then that's the
date that we're working towards. Now, in
general, these long-term plans, so
there's different styles of
periodization that you may have heard
of, such as conjugate, undulating,
linear, otherwise known as traditional,
block periodization. Okay? These are all
different styles of periodization where,
you know, a rule that I know, if someone
asked me what style of periodization to
use, I kind of have to stop and think.
It's like, well, I guess I use all of
it. And that's something that I have
learned is you can and should integrate
different styles of periodization. I've
seen a lot of people the way that they
think and translate in or I should say
interpret periodization and and the
style that they have, it must be, you
know, a specific style like it's a
religion. Well, that's not how it goes.
And I've seen people make comments
through social media debate saying
things like, "Linear sucks. I'm team
undulating." And I look at that and I
think, you kind of probably don't know
much about periodization, you know,
that's a clear demonstration with that
sentence that you kind of just don't.
This is where I'd like to shed a little
bit of light, you know, you guys learn
from the programs that I provide for
most of you. I program for most of you
here. And, you know, I will tell you
right now, there's linearity components
to all of our programming. We undulate.
So, undulate means kind of like training
changing usually the modality such as
volume. So, high volume phases, low
volume phases. Undulate comes from the
Latin word unda, which means wave. So,
we're basically moving up and down in a
wave-like pattern. What are we moving up
and down? Accumulation, so high volume,
intensification, low volume, back to
accumulation, back to intensification.
Whereas, a more linear approach is high
volume, less volume, less volume, less
volume, peak, you know? And at the same
time, the intensity is inversely
proportionate to that. We start with low
intensity when we're doing our high
volume, low intensity, and then
gradually we increase our intensity over
the course of the long-term plan. The
general premise is to begin the
long-term plan with high volume and
greater training variation to build a
broad base of general physical
preparedness. Okay, so what I mean by
that is at the start of the long-term
plan, as I mentioned, we're starting
with high volume. We're also starting
with higher amounts of variation. Okay,
this is base building. A pyramid will
only peak as high as the base is wide.
So, that's what we need to consider. The
peak of the pyramid, the least amount of
volume, the least amount of variation,
it's as specific as possible, because
the more variation we do, the more
fatigue we're accumulating. We need to
reduce the amount of exercises to reduce
the amount of fatigue to maximize our
performance. But early on, what we want
to do is kind of build a really broad
base. Broad base of what? You know, this
is why I like to talk about structural
balance. So, broad base of I want kind
of everything to be strong. Okay, I want
you to have no weak points. So, this
could be a great start point is
determining your weak points so we have
none of those, right? So, when you're
training for specificity, the fact is we
can't worry so much about weak point
training when we're training for
specificity. So, that's the last phase
of our long-term plan. It's like, we
don't have time for your weakness. We
need for, you know, the specific sport
that you're about to enter to be really,
really good. So, I don't care what
you're weak at. I'm just going to focus
on for powerlifting, squat, bench,
deadlift. For weightlifting, clean and
jerk and snatch. For whatever the sport,
just playing the hell out of that sport.
And yes, weak points are going to
present, okay? But in the off-season or
further away from that peak date, this
is our time to rectify those things and
create, you know, a broad base of
general physical preparedness. So, over
time volume is gradually reduced so
intensity can increase. Exercises also
become less varied and more specific,
allowing the athlete to reach peak
performance by the time of competition.
This reduction in volume and increase in
intensity can occur gradually in a
linear fashion, known as traditional
periodization. So, just so that you
know, playing is a bit of semantics
here. If you are to write an article and
you want to get really technical, the
technical term for that style of
periodization is called traditional.
However, it's also known as linear. A
lot of people get a little bit butt-hurt
when you call it linear, but if you do,
I know what you mean, okay? And the
reason for that is nothing is quite
linear, all right? Nothing is perfectly
linear and a lot of the times, over the
course of the long-term plan, you know,
your energy levels and and performance
levels will fluctuate, as well as some
planned fluctuations in volume and
intensity, such as deloads, which is
another topic altogether. Now, let's
talk about one of the most popular,
famous texts on periodization, and that
is the book called Periodization by
Tudor Bompa. Now, a general summary of
the way that he likes to split up his
long-term plan is three phases, starting
with an accumulation phase. Okay, so
that's the start of the long-term plan
and that's typically how it's taught. We
start with really, really high volume.
Okay, so the emphasis is general
physical preparedness, work capacity,
and foundational fitness. Okay, so it's
less specific. From the accumulation
phase, we move into the transmutation
phase, which is where part of the
accumulation phase, we're building, you
know, fitness, we're learning the
techniques, we're building muscle and
work capacity. So, that's our
accumulation phase. Then, we turn all of
that muscle that we've just built and
that work capacity into strong muscle
and functional muscle. Okay, so that's
our transmutation phase. So, this is
where we see a gradual reduction in
volume so that we can gradually increase
the intensity. Okay, how long does that
go for? Well, [snorts] how long is the
phase that we have? How long is the
long-term plan that we're giving us? So,
I said to you, I like to start with,
just generally, 16 weeks is a really
nice time frame to see really great
results in your training. Okay, humans
love to see the fruits of their labor.
What do I mean by that? You know, for
people to just come in and just keep on
building muscle and just keep on
training, and and hopefully it's moving
forward, but we can't quite measure it.
Gets a little bit boring for I would say
majority of the people that we work
with. Okay? A lot of people it's quite
popular these days for people to say,
you know, stop changing your training
programs too frequently. Okay? Just
stick to the same thing over and over.
Okay? So, terminology that I quite like,
till the wheels fall off. Okay? So, you
know, I like to provide four-weekly
mesocycles. Okay? It's not, you know,
something that I'm, you know, set in
stone about. Sometimes I write
eight-weekly programs. You know, and
I've worked with many people that use
different lengths of mesocycle, and, you
know, the longest that I've heard is
till the wheels fall off. I don't know
what that means. You know, it could be
it could be half a year. And I've heard
of people, in fact, I was listening to a
podcast this morning where a fellow was
talking about following the same program
for 5 years straight, and that being the
optimal strategy. And I look at it and
say, I can see how it works. I can.
However, you know, there's a lot that
goes into our performance over the long
term. One of the key factors that I'm
always prioritizing is the enjoyment of
the training by the individual that I'm
working with. And majority of people
like a little bit of variation in their
program. Okay? Now, I've heard people
say, you know, for good reason, they
want to avoid boredom. That's why they
use a lot of variation, or, you know,
frequent change of programs. So, you
know, shorter duration mesocycles,
because they don't want to get bored.
And I've heard people say, which I quite
like, you know, I'll tell you what's
boring is not getting results. You know,
that's really boring. I'd hate to not
achieve results. But I'll tell you now,
I can I can and do and will and continue
to achieve great results with
four-weekly mesocycles as well. I
coached the world's strongest man with
four-weekly mesocycles, and that's not
the only strong person that I train. I'm
also quite strong myself, and I've got a
shopping list of high-level athletes
that I've used the same approach with.
So, to say that short duration
mesocycles don't work is false. But I'll
not say that long duration mesocycles
don't work either. They do. Okay? So,
it's kind of like personal preference.
Winston, is it always an even split for
phases, or would you spend like eight
weeks in accumulation four weeks four
weeks great question and not necessarily
like it depends on how long do we have a
really great question so how long are my
accumulation phases how long are my
intensification phases is it eight weeks
is it four weeks what is it well you
know from the dates that we set our
goals how many weeks is that process so
where do we start now if you come to me
with 12 weeks I'm going to look at it
and say okay you could evenly split that
up and say four weeks hypertrophy four
weeks strength and then four weeks of
peaking that's very even alternatively
you could be a bodybuilder coming to me
saying I've got a competition in this
time and then I look at it and say you
know what you've done years of
accumulation I don't need to do
hypertrophy you've got the muscle so you
know what I'm going to do I'm going to
do eight weeks of strength and then I'm
going to peak that strength over a
shorter duration you know at the end
which will probably be four weeks
alternatively you could be an absolute
beginner saying I know I'm a beginner
and this is usually not recommended but
sometimes it happens I've had people
that come to me and it's like I don't
train but I had this he made a
bet with me that he's going to out
deadlift me in 12 weeks time and it was
a significant amount of money he didn't
tell me the dollar amount but this guy
was quite wealthy and he said and I
can't let him beat me he's like all
right okay well you know I'm going to
peak you in 12 weeks you've never
trained but I have to peak you in 12
weeks also not recommended so a typical
peaking strategy over 12 weeks if you
say hypertrophy for four weeks strength
for four weeks and then peak for four
weeks well I'll tell you now strength
requires a pretty drastic reduction in
volume to be able to shift heavy loads
so something that I would do in that
case is like this person's an absolute
beginner these people are able to get
stronger with hypertrophy style of
training so my objective is like you're
not going to build that much muscle in a
four week phase so I'll go you know what
I want to do hypertrophy the whole way
through and my peak is also going to be
a lot of volume in the peak because
you're not strong enough to be
accumulating enough fatigue to need to
reduce that much volume and the same can
apply for a different athlete so you get
a rugby player in their off season what
do we work on what are the weaknesses of
the rugby player? That rugby player
could be massive and slow and not very
skillful. So, in that off-season, what
am I going to do? You know, I probably
wouldn't need to do hypertrophy work in
that off-season. So, a lot of people
assume that off-season in team sports is
like go straight to high volume, go
straight to hypertrophy. It's like,
well, what if that individual's strength
is their size? So, there's a lot of very
gifted athletes of various sports like
rugby players that are just massive.
Maybe, I don't want to say, you know,
generalize, but a lot of the times there
are people that are really, really big
and that's how they get away with not
being as technical of an athlete, right?
And they're they're able to kind of just
like beat most people up just because
they're a lot stronger and bigger than
them. So, what are they going to do in
their off-season? Well, they've got the
size, let me tell you. They've got the
strength, let me tell you. I'm going to
make that person fitter, faster, more
skillful in their off-season, okay? Now,
and then we get to the realization
phase. So, accumulation, volume.
Transmutation, we reduce volume and lift
heavier loads. And then the realization
is another way of saying peak. Now,
that's kind of like as the textbook
suggests, this is the long-term plan.
How long are these phases? Well, a lot
of the times this is even discussed over
a 12-month plan. So, that's those three
phases are done over 12 months, where
the peaking, as mentioned by Tudor
Bompa, the author of this book, is 4 to
6 weeks for a peaking phase. So,
therefore, that would mean 46 to 48
weeks of the transmutation and
accumulation. And then half that, so 24
weeks of accumulation, 24 weeks of
transmutation, 4 weeks of realization.
That's an option. Now, I'm going to talk
in plain English, okay? So, I was once
asked the question, you know, what's
your you talk about your five-step model
of periodization, and it prompted this.
So, I don't have like I guess I do have
my five-step model, but it's based on
the literature. Like I didn't invent any
of this. So, my model is based on Tudor
Bompa's model, but just with different
terminology, okay? And I like to
separate the phases in layman's terms
and say, "What do we need to do? What do
we need to do? Now, this kind of is
different depending on the level of the
individual. So, this is basically what
I've written out for you guys is the
assumption of the individual that you're
working with is starting from scratch.
Okay, they've never stepped foot in the
gym before and they want to use this
space. So, someone comes to you, they've
never trained before and they say, "I
want to one day be a professional
powerlifter, a professional bodybuilder,
a professional tennis player, whatever
it might be." And they say, "What do I
do?" And some people come to me and
they're like, "I don't know what to do."
So, I said, "I don't know how to train
you. You better go see professional."
It's like, "No, no, no. You guys are the
professionals." If they're a beginner,
if they want to use this space, they
need to do this stuff. Okay, a tennis
player doing a squat is the same type of
squat as any other athlete, especially
in their early phases. Okay, and I say
tennis player, but also let's just say a
bodybuilder. Okay, they need to build
muscle. Before they go and do all this
amazing muscle building techniques and
and you know, train to fail and and
whatever your programming strategies
are, you need to learn how to move
first. On what? On the fundamental
movement patterns. Okay, so this is
where learn to move is. I'm going to get
into this. So, this is my five-step
model. So, that's it in a nutshell and
I'm going to go into each of these.
Learn to move first. No matter what you
do, you need to understand the lifting
techniques. After that, we need to now
consider building our general fitness.
So, building work capacity to be able to
handle the demands of the later phases.
Handle what demands? I'll tell you now,
to build muscle you got to train hard.
To build strength, you got to train
hard. A beginner doesn't know how to
work hard yet. So, we've got to build
that pain tolerance, I call that. Okay,
before we then say, "Okay, cool. Let's
do hypertrophy. Let's start training to
fail." That's not going to be very
successful. So, we need to gradually
expose the individual to gradually
increasing intensities, gradually
increasing volumes. So, this is where,
you know, teaching people that the start
of the long-term plan should be where we
perform the highest amount of volume. Uh
not so fast. If you're a beginner, you
don't have the work capacity to be
performing your highest amount of volume
yet. We need to build that work capacity
to be able to handle that. Different
strategy if you don't come to me as a
beginner. So, I work with a lot of
people that surely are not beginners,
okay? And I wouldn't put you through
this learn-to-move phase. Different
strategy, okay? But, this is starting
from scratch. Now, those two phases,
learn to move, build work capacity, then
we go on to the fun stuff. Now, we can
say we've got the three-step model,
which is hypertrophy, that's another way
of saying, you know, the accumulation
phase, the strength phase, that's the
transmutation, and then our peak,
showcase the performance under
competition-like conditions, so
realization. Now, let's get deeper into
this. So, our learn-to-move phase, learn
to move on what? Okay, so, this is what
I like to say, you know, of course, it's
case by case, but in general, I like to
split this up into four categories. In a
learn-to-move phase, so, I use my
daughter as the example, when she comes
to learn how to train, I'm not going to
overwhelm her with a shopping list of
different exercises, because that's fun,
okay? What I like to consider is I want
you to learn as quickly as possible on
the fundamental movement patterns. So, I
like to split it up into four movement
patterns, a squat, a hinge, a push, and
a pull. One exercise from each category,
do it all in one day. So, that's pretty
much my learn-to-move phase, and do two
to three days per week. You can do the
same session every time, okay? So,
minimize the training variation. So,
even though I said, in general, the
long-term plan we want to be the most
varied in the beginning and the most
volume, not now, okay? When you're
learning how to move, low training
variation with the emphasis on movement
literacy. Just do the squat, you know,
choose a squat pattern that's
appropriate for the individual. A lot of
individuals may not be able to start
with the barbell on their back, so don't
start with the barbell back squat. It
might be a goblet squat or a counter
balance squat, whatever it may be, okay?
But, choose the squat pattern that's
appropriate for the individual. It may
be a lunge, so I'll also categorize
lunging in the squat category, okay?
Then, we have the hinge pattern. Just so
that you know, don't overcomplicate
this. My favorite exercise to teach an
absolute beginner how to pick something
up off the ground is a conventional
deadlift. A lot of people say other
things like, you know, back extension.
I'll tell you now, get an absolute
beginner to do a back extension, quite
often, they do some type of a funky
movement, okay? A, you know, a
conventional deadlift, bending over and
picking something up off the ground is a
lot more of a natural movement pattern
than, you know, an RDL or a back
extension or a, you know, choose your
your hip hinge exercise. Conventional
deadlift, that's essentially all you're
doing. You're bending over and picking
something up off the ground. Now,
conventional deadlift doesn't need to be
performed with a barbell. It can be done
with a kettlebell. Okay? Such as my
4-year-old daughter, she's 5 now. The
first time she did weights was a 4-kg
kettlebell. So, a squat pattern, a hinge
pattern, a push pattern, and a pull
pattern. What's a good push pattern?
Dumbbell press, incline, I don't care,
flat. Choose the one that's most
appropriate for the individual and just
do more of that. Okay? Pull, a lat
pull-down. Okay? Look at the rep ranges
that I've chosen here. Okay? It's
specific, so every exercise comes with a
slightly different profile. Okay? So,
squats and deadlifts, the way that I'm
teaching you, they are somewhat complex.
So, it's not a matter of do tons of reps
so that they can engrain the movement
pattern. They're probably going to
engrain the incorrect patterns if you do
tons of reps. Okay? Because there's a
lot of technical breakdown on these
complex movements such as a squat
[clears throat] and deadlift with our
lighter reps. So, there's no need to
take these movements to failure in this
phase. It's just about refining good
movement. We get to the muscle building
later. Trust me, you got plenty of time
for this. But, the rep ranges that we
choose, I've given you guys a range, but
it really depends on the exercise that
we're choosing. The higher the
complexity such as a squat and a
deadlift, the lower the reps to avoid
technical breakdown. The lower the
complexity such as your pushing and
pulling, it's easier exercises, right?
So, doing a flat press, you know, a lat
pull-down, it's a lot easier than a
squat and a deadlift from a body
positional standpoint. Okay? Therefore,
we can use high rep ranges. How long
does that take? It doesn't take long.
That beginner phase, uh you can get out
of that year in a really, really short
amount of time. Okay? Depending on your
commitment levels, depending on your
level of coordination, it could be two
to four weeks. That's your beginner
phase. Okay? Especially if you're doing
the exact same program over and over.
Okay? You don't need muscle soreness on
your first day of training. You don't
need to vomit after your first day of
training. That's not the indicator of a
successful session. Okay? In fact, it
can be detrimental to being able to
position yourself to perform the next
day. Okay? Who did you know squats on
their first leg session and couldn't sit
on the toilet for a week? Like, that was
me and that's because I thought that's
what you have to do. You got to train
and then you get leg soreness and then I
wasn't able to sit down. I was walking
funny for an entire week and what was
the result of that? I hated training my
lower body so I started avoiding it. I
don't teach people that way anymore. I
give them, you know, just a small dose
and then they come back to the next day
and it's like, "Oh, yeah, a little bit
of soreness but it's fine. It's like
amazing." Okay? This is This is correct.
So, building work capacity as we say
with a long-term plan should be starting
at the highest amount of volume. Well,
we need to build the work capacity to be
able to tolerate those high levels of
volume. So, here's my favorite strategy
to do that. So, we've just done a phase
of learning how to move so we've got a
lot more, you know, movement literacy, a
lot more competency under the barbell.
Now, we then go to adding a little bit
more volume, adding a little bit more
effort, working a little bit harder,
taking the individual to a closer
proximity to failure, teaching the
individual what it feels like to work
hard. Okay? So, here are a few
strategies that I have here. So, with
introducing more volume, so this is a
very easy way of illustrating this, is
by adding an extra set every week. Okay?
So, you choose your main exercise,
whatever that may be. Week one you do
two sets of that exercise. The next week
you add a set. The next week you add a
set. The next week you add a set and so
on. Okay? So, week one it's two sets.
Next week it's three sets. Next week
it's four sets. The next week it's five
sets. And we've accumulated a ton of
volume in that phase and we have
gradually built work capacity as well
as, you know, gradually working at a
higher RPE every session. Okay? Teaching
the individual what it feels like to
work hard gradually. Next phase,
hypertrophy. So, this is where you could
come to that accumulation phase as
written by Tudor Bompa. Okay?
Hypertrophy. Now, this is where we
start. This is I would consider to be
the highest volume phase of our
long-term plan, the hypertrophy phase.
So, we've built up to that with our work
capacity phase. Now, you can kind of
like pick up where we left off. How much
volume is appropriate? You know, it
depends on the individual. So, let's use
a little bit of the research. A lot of
the research tells us 10 to 20 sets per
body part per week is kind of like a
rough guideline. Now, 10 to 20 sets,
that doesn't tell us a huge amount. Like
it really depends on what exercise. Like
10 sets of a squat is very different to
10 sets of a leg extension. But most
intelligent people don't just do 10 sets
of one exercise. It's usually broken
down into complex movements, less
complex, and least complex. Okay, so if
it's squats, let's illustrate that.
Complex movement, the most complex, you
could say a barbell squat pattern,
front, back, high bar, low bar, whatever
it might be. Secondary exercise, we go a
little bit less complex. Let's choose a
machine variation, hack squat, leg
press. The next set, sorry, the next
exercise, let's choose something less
complex again, where we don't require
the same amount of energy that required
it for the first sets of the day,
because we're going to be in a more
fatigued state. You can't go and do big
compound movements at the end of the
day. You can try, it's not going to be
very effective. But you can do small
exercises like isolation exercises. So,
a lot of the times when we're dividing
up our total volume, we're kind of
dividing it up into different
categories, really complex, not as
complex, and really simple exercises.
But something that I like to say is, you
know, if that's the range that a lot of
the scientists mutually agree on, 10 to
20 total sets per muscle group per week,
you don't need to start at the high end.
I like to start at the minimal effective
dose and work up if we need to. Most
cases, you don't need to. Okay?
Typically, we're increasing the volume,
not via [clears throat]
increasing reps and sets, but rather
increasing the load that we're lifting.
Okay? So, 10 sets of 10 on 100 kg. Okay?
Reps * sets * load. Okay, then we add 5
kg or 5%. So, 10 by 10 on 105 kg. Okay?
So, if you do the maths, you times the
reps * sets * the load lifted, and we
now have higher volume. The next week,
110 kg. Okay? So, by simply increasing
the loads that we're lifting from week
to week, which is what we should be
doing, we are increasing volume without
having to manipulate the reps and sets.
Okay, so don't always default to as we
build more work capacity, we have to do
more reps and sets to be effective
sessions. No, not necessarily. I very
rarely perform, you know, the top end of
that range, 20 sets per muscle group per
week with anyone that I work with,
beginner, intermediate, or advanced. I
very rarely take it to that amount of
volume. Typically, I'm at the lower end,
you know, anywhere between kind of like
8 to 12 for majority of my programs. For
you guys, that's the sweet spot for me.
And I don't do that by counting how many
sets I've given you. Okay, so so that's
kind of like a guide that we have in the
background, right? So if you say to me,
"How many sets do I have?" I'm going to
get your program and I'm going to
physically count it. That's how I'm
going to figure it out. Okay, but what I
like to do is say, "How many sessions
have we done?" Right? Now, within these
sessions, so if you got four to five
training sessions, if you got four
sessions, what's an effective session? I
can't just give you 20 sets in one day.
You're going to be exhausted. You can't
do that effectively. We're going to
compile a whole bunch of junk volume
that's just ineffective and a waste of
time. Okay, so we're going to be doing
the appropriate amount of work for that
individual for that day. How many sets
is that in a day? Well, it depends how
strong you are. The stronger you are,
the longer your rest between sets, the
less total sets you're going to be doing
in that day, but you're doing a lot
heavier weight. Okay, so I'm just
expressing to you guys not to be limited
by a specific number, but in general,
you know, like that's kind of what we're
looking for. Okay, four to five days per
week with a hypertrophy phase. I'd say
that's sweet spot. Now, understand
that's called optimal, then we also have
a thing called practical. Not everyone
is able to allocate four to five days
per week for our training. So what do we
do then? We don't just flip out and say,
"I can't train you now." Cool. So this
is where it's going to be really hard to
achieve that 10 to 20 sets per muscle
group per week. Oh well, it's totally
fine. There's a lot of research that
supports that we can achieve meaningful
gains with a lot less volume than that
10 to 20 sets per muscle group per week.
Okay, even suggesting that we can really
perform one banger of a top set per
muscle group or movement pattern, so
long as that movement is taken
absolutely to fail, we can achieve
meaningful gains training that way.
Okay? So, the goal in the hypertrophy
phase is to build muscle that supports
the strength and as and or the
aesthetics goal. Okay? So, why do I put
that there? Because the hypertrophy
phase for a bodybuilder looks different
to the hypertrophy phase for a
powerlifter. The powerlifter must be
performing exercises that are still
specific to them achieving their end
goal, which is to be good at a squat,
bench, press, deadlift. So, therefore,
powerlifter in their hypertrophy phase
would include doesn't have to be the
exact competition movements, but a
variation of those would be wise.
Whereas, a bodybuilder, you know, it
doesn't matter which exercise they're
choosing for their hypertrophy phase.
Same with, you know, a team sport
athlete or a combat athlete. You know,
they might need to train hip extension,
knee extension, horizontal push. So, you
can do a barbell bench press for a
horizontal push. You can also do a
dumbbell press. You can also do a
push-up. Whatever's appropriate for the
individual. And whatever you deem to be
appropriate as a professional coach.
Okay? Okay, research-backed insight.
Now, hypertrophy phase. So, this is
something a clear distinction between
the hypertrophy phase and what comes
next, which is the strength phase. The
clear distinction is what are the reps
and the loads that we need to do for our
hypertrophy phase. And this is where
people come to the conclusion that we
don't need periodization. Hypertrophy
outcomes are very forgiving. So, to
achieve a hypertrophy outcome, you know,
we can do this there is many roads that
lead to Rome. Okay? So, what does that
mean? Different exercises. So, target
the muscle and make sure that muscle is
limiting factor. Okay? So, what exercise
would that be to do quadriceps? Well, we
have a large amount to choose from. What
rep ranges? Well, it doesn't really
matter. A meta-analysis by Brad
Schoenfeld and colleagues, they found
that hypertrophy can be achieved with a
broad range of reps, so anywhere between
5 to 30. That's not to say that less
than 5 didn't achieve hypertrophy, nor
did it say that more than 30 didn't
achieve hypertrophy. That was just the
range within the the research
parameters. 5 to 30, and they found that
as long as the movement was taken to the
same proximity to failure, hypertrophy
results were equal with all of the reps.
Okay? Now, that doesn't mean you can
just choose whatever rep range you want.
You need to consider the complexity of
the movement. In general, the greater
the complexity of the movement, the
lower reps you should be choosing. So,
big compound squats and deadlifts,
probably choose lower rep ranges. Don't
do sets of 30 just because this research
said you can achieve the same amount of
hypertrophy. Okay? What also needs to be
considered when it comes to hypertrophy
is the muscle that you're targeting
needs to be the limiting factor of the
movement. Okay? So, if you do a squat
for 30 reps, I promise you, you know,
whatever target muscle you think you're
targeting isn't the one that failed
first. It was probably your
cardiovascular system or even your lower
back. That's typically what happens when
you're doing these high rep sets. Okay?
So, if you're targeting quads, choose a
different exercise or choose a different
rep range. Okay? One that's appropriate
for the movement. The greater the
complexity, the lower the reps. The
lower the complexity, the higher the
reps. So, five reps on a calf raise, I
don't know. Some people I've heard
people say, "Yeah, it's really good."
Okay, great. If that works for you, go
do it. You can try it if you like and
tell me how you feel. I feel quite
understimulated when when I've done it
as a joke before, it kind of doesn't
really feel like much. Okay? So, choose
the appropriate rep range for the
specific exercise. The more isolated the
movement, do high rep ranges. So, what's
a good rep range for you to do calves
with? I like kind of like, you know, 12
and upwards, depending on the tempo that
we're using. Mechanical tension is key.
Okay? So, focus on intensity over
absolute load. So, training like a
bodybuilder, you don't need to lift
heavy weights. And this is where people
get the illusion that bodybuilders are
weak. They're not weak, they just, you
know, may have not trained with heavy
weights before. Strength requires
specificity, and if the bodybuilder has
been training specifically higher rep
ranges, they haven't practiced the skill
of lifting heavy weights. But I promise
you, with large amounts of muscle mass,
it will contribute to greater
contractile potential and greater
potential strength outcomes later down
the line. You still need to practice the
skill of lifting heavy weights. Okay?
So, the bodybuilder isn't necessarily
weak, they may not have practiced the
skill of lifting heavy weights, but I
promise you with that base and
foundation of large amounts of muscle,
they have huge strength potential. Next
phase, phase four is strength. Reduce
the reps, so now load does matter. Okay,
how much load do we need here? Well, a
lot of the research points to about 80%
and plus. Okay, so 80% of your one rep
max, if we're talking about our absolute
one rep max strength, we kind of need to
be working within those ranges. Okay,
now something you have to understand
with any strength phase, not every
exercise falls within this rule. Okay,
so I want to do like a leg day for your
strength phase, so I'm probably going to
do squats to start the day. What's the
appropriate rep range when we're talking
about 80% of your max? Six reps and
less, to put it simple. Okay, so if
you're doing 80% of your max, that's
kind of like six reps is your limit.
Okay, so what's the secondary exercise
after our squats on a strength phase? Do
we still need to do 80%? The answer is
no. Okay, so a lot of the time, by
default, most people are using conjugate
style of periodization, where the main
movement, so they're training multiple
modalities within the same program.
That's what conjugate means. Okay, or
that's what it means to conjugate. Okay,
so the first exercise of the day will be
strength rep range specific exercise to
achieve a strength outcome. Secondary
exercise to support that, you don't have
to do your accessory exercise, your
bicep work, your tricep work with 80% of
your max. Just because we want to train
biceps and triceps on strength day,
doesn't mean we have to do one to six
rep range with very, very heavy load.
It's not appropriate for the exercise.
Okay, so this is where every exercise,
every strength phase that I've given
you, typically is conjugate style of
periodization, you could say. It's
multiple modalities simultaneously,
where we prioritize strength, but we
include accessory exercise with a
hypertrophy stimulus. Okay, the volume
is slightly less. So, a lot of the
research points towards with with
hypertrophy, the research kind of said
10 to 20 sets per muscle group per week.
When it comes to strength, it's kind of
like six to 12, three to four sets per
movement pattern per session, two times
per week. So, Raya and colleagues, Dr.
Raya and colleagues, I forget the year.
Okay, so that's, you know, a really
great paper which suggests exactly what
I said. So, three to four sets, that's
kind of like, you know, six to to eight
or even up to 12. It actually says the
research I've abbreviated that, the
research says two to three times per
week. Okay, which is where we get, you
know, up to anywhere between six to 12
total sets per movement pattern per
week. When it's hypertrophy, it's per
muscle group per week. When it's
strength, it's per movement pattern per
week. Very big difference. Peaking
phase. So, what's the objective of
peaking? So, a lot of the times it's
like and even here, I've written, you
know, working towards, you know,
practicing one rep max or near maximal
lifts. Now, I want you to understand
that is for if you were to peak for a
one rep max event. So, not everyone
wants to peak for a one rep max event.
You may be a sprinter, shot putter, high
jumper, a martial artist, rugby player.
In those events, you're probably not
going to worry so much about getting a
one rep max in these big complex
movements. You're probably going to want
to peak in power and speed. Which is a
different peaking strategy. But either
way, the biggest priority in the peaking
phase is to maximize performance by
being as specific as possible. So, if
you want to lift heavy in your sport,
you got to lift heavy in your peaking
phase. If you want to be fast in your
sport, you got to be fast in your
peaking phase. Okay, and maximizing the
performance in that specific task and
minimizing the volume by taking out
everything else that is a variation of
what you want to do. Okay, so all of
your amazing bicep curls, tricep
extension, calf raises, all these
exercises may not be necessary. And
maybe the first place to look when we
want to start reducing volume is reduce
the exercises that are not specific. So,
this is the phase where a lot of people
say, "We're deloading. We're getting
close to comps, so we have to go
lighter." No, reducing the fatigue,
which is usually accumulated by the
accumulation of volume. Okay, so we
reduce the volume rather than reducing
the intensity. We need to maintain the
intensity if you were to step into some
type of a competition. You need to be
working really, really, really hard. So,
the sprinters in their peaking phase are
running really fast. This is the fastest
they'll be running in their entire
long-term plan in their peaking phase.
They're doing way less volume, less
bouts of that. Okay, but the intensity
needs to be at the highest, which is
going to be specific to competition. How
do we modify this for aesthetics goals?
Okay, so this is where I say, you know,
instead of sitting there saying
periodization doesn't work for
aesthetics, it's like, well, learning
how to move works for if you have an
aesthetics goal. You need to learn how
to move with all these things. Building
work capacity is pretty important if you
want to, let's just say be a
bodybuilder, you need to train pretty
hard. You need to learn how to do that.
So, going from a learn to move phase to
a building work capacity phase kind of
also matters. You know, and then going
for a, you know, from there to a
hypertrophy phase, yeah, sure, we want
to build muscle. So, hypertrophy phase
works. So far, periodization is not
looking so bad for our aesthetics
athlete. Now, does an aesthetics athlete
benefit from training a strength phase
after that? Well, a lot of the
researchers say yes, they do. So, the
stronger the athlete, okay, the better
skilled they are at lifting weights, the
higher the quality sets are going to be
performed during the hypertrophy phases.
Now, this is where it changes. So, if
you come to me with a with an aesthetics
focus, an aesthetics goal, I don't need
to do a peaking phase for you. If you
want to step on stage or, you know, fit
in your wedding dress. Okay, so so very
different, but equally as important for
the individual. Okay, I don't need to
peak your one rep max or peak your speed
or peak your power, peak any of those
things. Okay, I need you to be looking
the way that you want to look on the day
that you want to look that good. Okay,
so what do I need to do with this
outcome? Okay, so this is where my
strategy, if I was to plan a program for
someone who only gave a about how
they looked, this is where I'd follow
the same strategy. Learn to move, build
work capacity, then from here,
hypertrophy as usual, reduce the reps
and increase the load as usual. That's
going to be beneficial for hypertrophy
athlete. Then we can go to a programming
strategy that I love to use, which is
monthly undulating periodization, which
is where from there, we just continue to
undulate or alternate between our
hypertrophy and strength phases forever
and ever. Now, the funny thing is I
mentioned this sometime ago. This is a
strategy that I use, something that I
taught. And one fellow in particular
jumped on my comment section, his name
is Josh Lenartowicz, and he's
Australia's best bodybuilder. Okay, he's
a Olympia level bodybuilder. And his
comment on there was along the lines of,
"That's just how I train. Love this,
that's how I train." So, I thought, "I'm
in good company then." You know? So,
this is how the best some of the best do
it. Okay? I want you guys to understand,
you are going to hear a lot of people
say, "Don't do high volume because Mike
Mentzer and Dorian Yates." And then
you're going to hear other people
saying, "You don't need to do barbell
movements, squats, bench, deadlift
because Phil Heath." Now, a lot of the
times, when there's generalizations made
like this, people are naming one or two
people. Okay? That's the exception, not
the rule. Does that make sense? Okay?
So, to say a plan won't work for a
hypertrophy outcome is just incorrect.
You can build muscle and, you know,
continue to lose fat without following a
specific periodized plan, keep on
working hard, keep on targeting the
right muscles, keep on applying the
principles of 10 to 20 sets per muscle
group per week, taking the movements to
a close proximity to fail, eat well.
When I say eat well, understand, you
know, how to track your macros and
eating appropriately to achieve your
desired body composition, that's what I
mean when I say eat well. You can
achieve an an incredible outcome. You
can also achieve an incredible
measurable outcome by planning your
long-term aesthetics program with this
style of periodization. Now, as I was
doing that, I kind of realized there was
a lot of information condensed in what I
thought was the right amount of time,
but it seemed like it was a pretty short
time because I ended up speaking pretty
quickly. There's a lot of concepts that
I discussed quite quickly, I would say.
So, if there's anything you guys didn't
understand, I apologize. I try and
simplify these things as best as I can.
If there's something you want to learn
more about, put it in the comment
section. Do me a favor, if you like this
type of content, please subscribe. That
helps me a lot because I want to build
my subscriber database to help more and
more people because quite frankly, I
think this is really, really important
if you like to know how to lift and get
strong and get amazing results in the
gym like I do. Anyways, hope you
enjoyed. See you next time.